# disketo developper guide

Disketo is implemented in perl. Here are some internal and implementation specific bits.

# The parser mechanism
The parser has four phases:

- Parser (the lexical analyser)
  - read disketo script file into the string
  - split to lines
  - split each line to individual tokens 
- Analyser (the syntactic analyser)
  - converts the rows of tokens into the syntax tree
  - verifies the valid commands
- Preparer (the semantic analyser)
  - verifies the dependencies
  - prepares the values (if needed)
  - evaluates the `sub`s
  - resolves the `$$` and `$$$` markers values
- Interpreter (self-explaining)
  - produces the actual functions (subs) to be executed
  - calls them

_Note:_ Because of that, the `$$` marker cannot contain the _operation name_. Furthermore, it cannot be used inside of the `sub`s (or, in general any other values, like "backup-2020-02-$$.bak". It's just only for the simple atomic values.

# The disketo script syntax

The syntax of the disketo script in the Backus-Naur form:
```
<SCRIPT> ::= <STATEMENTS>

<STATEMENTS> ::= <STATEMENT> "newline" <STATEMENTS> | ""

<STATEMENT> ::= <COMMAND>

<COMMAND> ::= <command_name> <COMMAND_ARGUMENTS>

<COMMAND_ARGUMENTS> ::= <ARGUMENTS>

<ARGUMENTS> ::= <ARGUMENT> <ARGUMENTS> | ""

<ARGUMENT> ::= <COMMAND> | <value>

<command_name> ::= sequence of [a-z0-9\-], but with first char [a-z]

<value> ::= any text wrapped in double quotes (")
          | number
          | text starting "sub {" or "sub{" with matching ending "}"
```

# The commands
All the supported commands are listed in the `Disketo_Instruction_Set` module. It also specifies the links between them and all their properties (including the documentation). Links to module `Disketo_Instructions`, which implements them (in fact the functions producing the functions to be executed).

# Context, resources, metas, dependencies
During the runtime of the disketo script, there is an instance of a _context_ held. The main job for the context is to hold the reference to the actual resources which are processed. This is done via the context field named `resources`. The `resources` field contains hash, where the keys are the directories and their values are references to array of their child resources (not nescessary only the files).

However, the `resources` field is not the only one. There are obviously more felds present, but they are not mandatory. For instance "number of the child resources of the each folder" or "date of last change". Theese are called _meta_s, because their values are 1:1 mapped to the resources. The second kind is _groups_. There are different, they map some value to (sub)set of the resources. The groups gets usualy generated by the `group` operations.

Most of the _meta_ fields gets produced by some of the commands automatically. However, you can quite allways specify custom one. See the `produces` (operation computes that field) or `requires` (operation needs to be already computed) properties of the operations. For instance, `filter by groups` requies the `groups`, which gets computed by some of the `group` operations. Disketo then verifies whether such "field dependencies" are satisfied.

_Note:_ The statement `print stats` prints the informations about the current context.

# A note about the hypermarker `$$$`
The hypermarker `$$$` inserts as a value all the root resources of the disketo script invocation. However, except for the `load` command, noone else is able to handle this value. Thus, currently, its only usage is to trigger the `load` operation by hand.

# Furthermore

Just consult the source code. It's a bit documented, hope it helps.


